App channel tutorial (#71)
hyperledger-labs/perun-doc: source/go-perun/app_tutorial/app.rst

App
===
We discussed the basic blocks needed for creating a channel in the :ref:`payment channel example <payment_tutorial_intro>`.
Additional channel parameters are required to define an app:
An ``app`` field stores the address of an additional on-chain app contract and a ``data`` field that is added to the channel's state to insert arbitrary data for describing app states.

We will implement two components in this section:

> #. An on-chain contract implementing the `Perun's Ethereum App interface <https://github.com/perun-network/perun-eth-contracts/blob/main/contracts/App.sol>`_. Most notably, the interface requires a ``validTransition`` function to validate the transition between app states to make the app logic enforceable without full consensus.

Reviewer: - I like the ordering here. First introduce the on-chain component. Then the off-chain component. **Can you use the same order in the text?** (I started already by simply moving up the part `On-chain component`.)

- Please place all parts belonging to the off-chain component within the section `Off-chain component`. (At the moment, `Data` and `Utilities` have their own section at the same section level. If you feel all of this is too much for one page, you can also move `Off-chain component` and `On-chain component` to separate files.)

Author: I restructured the app section. Feel free to comment on the change.

App
...
This section will implement the Tic-Tac-Toe game as a local channel app with a matching smart contract representation.

.. note::
    The smart contract will act as an on-chain reference to validate the game's state transitions.
    This procedure is only needed in case of disputes.
    The primary point of interaction is the local channel app.

> Data

Author: Please check if the new app "intro" suits your intention.

====
Before we implement the channel app, we define the game's states.
We put this in ``app/data.go``.

The game state is handled in ``TicTacToeAppData``, which implements go-perun's ``Data`` interface.
``NextActor`` represents the next party expected to make a move, and ``Grid`` represents the Tic-Tac-Toe 3x3 grid.
The ``Grid`` indices are defined from the upper left to the lower right.

.. code-block:: go

    // TicTacToeAppData is the app data struct.
    type TicTacToeAppData struct {  // Grid:
        NextActor uint8             // 0 1 2
        Grid      [9]FieldValue     // 3 4 5
    }                               // 6 7 8

Encode
~~~~~~
The ``Data`` interface requires that ``TicTacToeData`` can be encoded onto an ``io.Writer`` via ``Encode``.
This method writes our game data to the given data stream.
It is needed to push the local game data to the smart contract.
Decoding will take place in the :ref:`app implementation <app_decoding>`.

> .. code-block:: go

Reviewer: Please replace all code blocks with references to the files.

Author: I will do this once the actual app code is finalized & published. Until then lines of code can change and mess up the `literalinclude`

.. code-block:: go

        // Check all set.
        for _, v := range d.Grid {
            if v != notSet {
                return false, nil
            }
        }
        return true, nil
    return true, nil
    }

Compute Final Balances
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Finally, we want to implement a function ``computeFinalBalances`` that computes the final balances based on the ``winner`` of the game.

First, we calculate the index of the ``loser``.
Notice that the way it is presented in code only works for two-party use cases.
Then we loop through all the assets (in our case, it will only be one: Ethereum).
In our case, "the winner takes it all". Therefore, we add the loser's balance to the winner's and set the balance of the loser to zero.
Ultimately we return the final balance ``finalBals``.

.. code-block:: go

    func computeFinalBalances(bals channel.Balances, winner channel.Index) channel.Balances {
        loser := 1 - winner
        finalBals := bals.Clone()
        for i := range finalBals {
            finalBals[i][winner] = new(big.Int).Add(bals[i][0], bals[i][1])
            finalBals[i][loser] = big.NewInt(0)
        }
        return finalBals
    }

> Local App

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Off-chain component
```

Then we fetch the grid values by calling ``readUInt8Array``, which reads the next nine bytes.
Finally, we convert the bytes to their respective field values by calling ``makeFieldValueArray``.

.. code-block:: go

    // DecodeData decodes the channel data.
    func (a *TicTacToeApp) DecodeData(r io.Reader) (channel.Data, error) {
        d := TicTacToeAppData{}

        var err error
        d.NextActor, err = readUInt8(r)
        if err != nil {
            return nil, errors.WithMessage(err, "reading actor")
        }

        grid, err := readUInt8Array(r, len(d.Grid))
        if err != nil {
            return nil, errors.WithMessage(err, "reading grid")
        }
        copy(d.Grid[:], makeFieldValueArray(grid))
        return &d, nil
    }

Validate Initial State
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
We will need to identify if an initial state is valid or not.
Hence, we create ``ValidInit`` that takes the channel's parameters ``channel.Params`` and a channel state ``channel.State`` as arguments.
If the given arguments do not match the expected ones for a valid app channel initialization, it should return an error.

> **Channel participants.**

Reviewer: Too many small code snippets (until "Actor index"). Combine into one.

.. code-block:: go

        appData, ok := s.Data.(*TicTacToeAppData)
        if !ok {
            return fmt.Errorf("invalid data type: %T", s.Data)
        }

**Grid.**
The grid must be empty. This is easily checkable by creating a new instance of ``TicTacToeAppData`` and comparing its gird with the given one.

.. code-block:: go

        zero := TicTacToeAppData{}
        if appData.Grid != zero.Grid {
            return fmt.Errorf("invalid starting grid: %v", appData.Grid)
        }

**Finalization.**
Verify that the channel state is not finalized.
Remember that a final state cannot be further progressed. Therefore it would not make sense to accept one here.

.. code-block:: go

        if s.IsFinal {
            return fmt.Errorf("must not be final")
        }

**Actor index.**
Validate the index of the ``NextActor``
If no deviations are found, ``nil`` is returned.

.. code-block:: go

        if appData.NextActor >= numParts {
            return fmt.Errorf("invalid next actor: got %d, expected < %d", appData.NextActor, numParts)
        }
        return nil
    }

.. _app_validate_transition:

Validate Transitions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> ``ValidTransition`` is a critical part of the app implementation in which we check if a given game move is valid or not.

Reviewer: This is only the off-chain valid transition function. Should be pointed out. Even more critical is actually the on-chain validTransition function, because it ultimatively decides what we can enforce.

The method takes the channel's parameters ``channel.Params``, the old and (proposed) new channel state ``channel.State``, and the actor index as arguments.

.. warning::

>     One mistake here could result in not noticing a fraudulent transition (= a game move that is not allowed), therefore, potentially putting the client's funds at risk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    A bug in the valid transition function can result in fraudulent state transitions (e.g., a game move that is against the rules), therefore, potentially putting the client's funds at risk.
```
